# Course Document: 3. Rice

## Page 1

Blast Brown Spot Stem Rot 
 
Sheath Blight 
Piricularia oryzae Drechslera oryzae/ 
Bipolaris oryzae 
Sclerotium oryzae Rhizoctonia solani 
Leaf Blast: Spindle or eye 
shaped lesion, ash colour in 
centre with dark brown margin. 
Under favourable conditions, 
lesion enlarge 
 
Collar Blast: Collar blast 
occurs when the pathogen 
infects the collar that can kill 
the entire leaf blade. 
 
Node Blast: Node turns 
blackish and break easily 
 
 
Panicle Blast: At the base of 
panicle brown to black or rings 
are formed. 
Early Stage: The grains do not 
fill as the food materials cannot 
reach to the young grains and 
ear turns white which is known 
as white head symptoms. 
Later Stage: The grains are 
filled up partially, the rotten 
neck cannot hold them and ear 
breaks down at the point of 
infection. 
Attacks rice plant at all stages of its 
growth. 
  
Symptoms of the disease are spots on 
the leaves and the glumes may also 
appear on the leaf sheath, panicles 
and stems. 
 
The spots are more or less round, 
dark brown colour in the centre 
which is surrounded by yellow halo. 
Culm and leaf sheath are affected 
at water level.  
 
These areas turn black and 
become large. 
 
 
Black powdery sclerotia are found 
within the Culm and leaf sheath. 
Spots or lesion near water level 
 
Lesions are oval or elliptical 
shaped 
 
The centre of the lesion is light 
coloured but margin dark 
coloured. 
 
Brownish sclerotia formed on the 
lesion look like skin of cobra 
snake.  
Symptoms of Diseases of Rice


---

## Page 2

Bakanae/Foot Rot Bacterial Blight 
 
Ufra 
 
Tungro 
 
Fusarium moniliforme/ 
Gibberella fujikuroi 
Xanthomonas campestris pv. 
oryzae 
Ditylenchus angustus Rice spherical tungro virus/ Rice 
bacilliform tungro virus 
Infected plants are several inches 
taller than normal plants. 
 
Plants are lin, thin and yellow 
green in colour 
 
Plants produce adventitious roots 
at the lower node 
 
Diseased plants bear few tillers 
and the affected tillers die before 
reaching maturity.  
Lesion may develops from 
anywhere on the leaf, but 
generally they start at the edges 
near the tip. 
 
The edges of the lesions are 
irregular and wavy. 
 
Straw colour discoloration. 
Chlorosis of the uppermost leaves 
of rice plants which are more than 
two months old. 
 
Flag leaf and panicle can be 
twisted and deformed 
 
When the panicle remains largely 
enclosed inside the boot is called 
Thor ufra and when the panicle 
emerges partially from the boot is 
called Pucca ufra. 
Plants become stunted 
 
Number of tillers is reduced and 
the leaves become yellow. 
 
Yellowing ranges from light 
yellow to orange yellow or 
brownish yellow. 
 
Pale yellow stripes are found 
 
Stripes are parallel to the veins 
 
Infected plants bear a few poor 
panicles.


---

## Page 3

Blast Brown Spot Stem Rot 
 
Sheath Blight 
*High relative humidity (90% 
or higher) 
*High nitrogen and low silica 
content of the soil. 
*Long dew period (10 hours or 
more) 
*Light rainfall or drizzle and 
overcast sky. 
*Close planting 
 
*Soil with low nitrogen content. 
*Deficiency of K, Mg and Silica 
*Dry soil, too high or too low water 
temperature. 
*High relative humidity, continued 
rain and cloudiness. 
* Seedling infection takes place 
when soil temperature below 25°C 
*Stagnant water in the field 
*Excessive nitrogen & low potash 
fertilizer. 
*Infected with stem borer. 
 *High humidity & warm 
temperature. 
*High nitrogenous fertilizer 
*Close planting 
 
Bakanae/Foot Rot Bacterial Blight 
 
Ufra Tungro 
*Soil temperature of 35°C 
*Damp soil condition 
*High nitrogenous fertilizer                          
application 
*High temperature 
*High nitrogenous fertilizer 
*K & P Deficiency 
*Excess silicon and magnesium 
*Heavy rain flooding 
Stagnancy of water and severe 
wind. 
*Temperature 28-30°C & 
saturated RH (75%) 
*Wettest areas & fields with high 
water level  
*Ufra infected rice is more 
susceptible to the blast pathogen 
*Presence of virus sources 
*Presence of the vector. 
*Age and susceptibility of the 
host plant 
*All growth stages of the rice 
plant specially the vegetative 
stage. 
 
 
 
 
 
Suitable Factors of Diseases of Rice


---

## Page 4

Blast Brown Spot Stem Rot 
 
Sheath Blight 
* Resistant varieties: BR-3, BR-4, BR-6, 
BR-8, IR-22 etc 
*Clean seed should be sown 
*Seedling should be raised under low land 
condition 
*Avoid excess nitrogenous fertilizer 
*Seed treatment with Granosan-M or 
Agrosan-GN at the rate of 2 tolas/mound or 
Vitavex-200 at the rate of 0.25% of seed 
weight. 
*Fungicides such as 
Benlate/Topsinmethyl/Blasticidine/Hinosan 
at the rate of 0.2% should be sprayed on the 
leaves at the time of panicle emergence 
*Cultivate resistant varieties: 
Biplob, Brrisail, Progoti, 
Mukta etc. 
*Sowing healthy seeds 
*Burning crop residues 
*Hot water treatment (50°C 
for 30 min) 
*Balance fertilizer 
Seedbed and land soil should 
be kept wetty 
* Benlate/ Hinosan at the rate 
of 0.2% at 10-15 days interval 
from 60 days of seedling. 
 
*Resistant varieties: Biplob, 
Borishal, Progoti, Mukta etc 
should be cultivated. 
*Stubble and residues should 
be burnt. 
*Crop rotation 
*Drained out the water and 
allowing soil to dry and crack 
before re-watering 
*Avoid excess nitrogen, 
balance with K 
*Spray with 
Benlate/Homai/Topsin-M at 
the booting and before 
flowering stage at the rate of 
0.2% at 9-15 days interval 
 
The disease is hard to control- 
*Varieties with moderate level 
of resistance such as BR-4, BR-
5, IR-25, BAU-63 etc. 
*Balance fertilizer and spacing 
*Destroy crop residues 
*Dry the field and re-water 
*Spray with 
Benlate/Hinosan/Topsin at the 
rate of 0.2% at 10-15 days 
interval 
 
 
 
Bakanae/Foot Rot Bacterial Blight 
 
Ufra Tungro 
*Resistant varieties: Biplob, 
Brrisall, Progati, Mukta etc 
*Collection of seed from disease 
free area 
*Destroy crop residue 
*Uprooting and destroying of the 
infected plants 
*Balance fertilizer should be used 
*Seed treatment with Vitavax-200 
*Resistant varieties such as IR-20, 
IR-22, BR-4, BR-14, BAU-63 etc 
*Balance fertilizer should be used 
*Field should be dried and allow 
to crack 
*Plant residues should be burnt 
*Seed should be collected from 
healthy plant 
 
*Resistant varieties such as Digha 
*Burning the crop residues 
*Summer ploughing 
*Destruction of infected seedling 
*Crop rotation 
*Spreading of Furadan at the rate 
of 5kg/bigha 
*Seed treatment with Carbofuran 
at the rate of 0.3kg/80kg 
*Resistant varieties such as Mala, 
Brisail, Kalojira, BR-5, 8, 10, 12 
etc 
*Weeds and infected plants 
should be destroyed 
*Application of insecticides to 
control insect (leaf hopper) 
 
 
Control of Diseases of Rice


---

## Page 5




---

