# Course Document: 6. Sugarcane, Mustard, Sunflower, Groundnut

## Page 1

Red Rot of Sugarcane Smut of Sugarcane Mosaic of Sugarcane Ratoon Stunting Disease (RSD) 
Colletotrichum falcatum Ustilago scitaminea Sugarcane Mosaic Virus Clavibacter xyli 
Recognized when canes are 
nearing maturity. 
 
Sugar content becomes low 
 
Third to fourth leaf from top 
turns paler and drops slightly. 
 
The cane becomes light weight. 
 
Dark reddish lesions develop 
on the midrib of the leaf. 
 
Discontinuous white/red 
lesions appear when cross 
sected  
 
Cane becomes shrinkage 
 
Long apex, whip-like, dusty, black, 
shoot several feet in length and 
curved 
  
Abnormal growth of shoot, devoid of 
leaves, slender and flexible 
  
At initial stages, the shoot is covered 
by a silvery-white thin membrane 
 
Appear about 6 weeks after 
planting & on maturity 
 
Oval to elongated pale yellow 
patches of irregular size on leaf 
 
 
Appears mainly on young unfold 
leaves 
 
Also appears on stem 
Growth is stunted. 
 
Germination is reduced and 
delayed. 
 
Internodes become short. 
 
Leaves yellowing 
 
Cane becomes thin 
 
Growth is affected during 
summer, wilting 
 
Pink colour near the nodes during 
immature stage 
Symptoms


---

## Page 2

Grey Blight/Alternaria Leaf 
Spot/Blight of Mustard 
Leaf Spots of Sunflower 
 
Leaf Spot of Groundnut ( Tikka)   
Alternaria brassicae   Alternaria helianthi Cercospora arachidicola (Early 
stage) 
Cercosporidium personatum (Late 
stage) 
 
At first pin head spot appears 
which increases later  
 
Pale to brownish circular lesion 
with dark concentric rings on 
leaves 
 
Spots also appear on stem & pod 
 
Pods become sunken 
 
Concentric ring with yellow 
hallow 
 
Spot irregular and circular shaped 
 
In severe, whole leaf is destroyed 
Cercospora arachidicola: 
Symptoms first appear at the age of 
1-2 months 
 
In early spots, spores are formed 
mostly on upper leaf surface 
 
Brown red irregular circular spot 
with yellow hallow. 
Cercosporidium personatum: 
Symptoms appear on both side of the 
leaf during the later part of the 
growing season 
 
In later, spots, spores are formed 
mostly on lower leaf surface  
 
Spots are more circular and darker 
than early spot


---

## Page 3

Red Rot of Sugarcane Smut of Sugarcane Mosaic of Sugarcane  Ratoon Stunting Disease (RSD) 
* Germination of the buds in 
unfavorable temperature and 
moisture condition. 
* Presence of stalk borer, moth 
borer and sugarcane weevil. 
* Injury to sett cutting. 
   
 
Grey Blight/Alternaria Leaf 
Spot/Blight of Mustard 
Leaf Spots of Sunflower 
 
Leaf Spot of Groundnut ( Tikka)  
*Foggy & Moist Weather are 
harmful 
*Long due period. 
*Light rainfall& drizzle favorable. 
*Excess N2 fertilizer.  
 *High moisture (above 95%) 
*High temperature (above 25°C) 
*Close planting  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Suitable Factors


---

## Page 4

Red Rot of Sugarcane Smut of Sugarcane Mosaic of Sugarcane  Ratoon Stunting Disease (RSD) 
*Use of resistant varieties e.g-
Iswardi- 2/54, Iswardi-16, 
Iswardi-17etc. 
*Setts should be collected from 
disease free plant 
*Dipping the cut end in coal-
tar before planting. 
*Infected plants should be 
burnt 
*Application of insecticide to 
control borer 
*Hot water treatment of setts 
(55°c for 10minutes). 
*Use of resistance variety 
*Uprooting and destroy of diseased 
plants 
*Setts should be collected from 
healthy plants 
*Hot water treatment of setts (54°C 
for 4 hours) 
* Destroy weed hosts 
*Use disease free sets  
*Use of resistance variety 
*Control insect vector timely 
* Destroy infected cane 
* Destroy weed hosts 
*Use of resistance variety 
* Use disease free sets 
* Infected plants and roots should 
be destroyed 
*Avoid ratooning in the infected 
field 
*Hot water treatment of setts 
(54°C for 4 hours)  
 
 
 
Grey Blight/Alternaria Leaf 
Spot/Blight of Mustard 
Leaf Spots of Sunflower 
 
Leaf Spot of Groundnut ( Tikka)  
*Destroy crop residues 
*Rotation with non-crucifer crops 
*Spray with Malathion @ of 0.2% 
to control aphid 
*Seed treatment with Vitavex-
200@ 0.25% of seed weight 
*Early sowing before 25 
November 
*Plant in a area that receives early 
morning sun 
* Seed should be collected from 
healthy plants 
* Destroy crop residues  
*Seed treatment with hot water & 
chemical fungicide 
*Spray 0.2% Dithane M-45 
 
 
*Avoid close planting 
*Proper fertilizer application & weed 
control 
*Crop residues should be burnt 
* Spray with Bavistin @ 0.1% from 
the first appearance of disease at 15-
20 days interval for 3-4 times 
*Seed treatment with Thiram@ 5g/kg 
seed 
 
 
 
 
Control


---

